1. Explain Synchronization in Java with Example.
Ans. Synchronization in Java is a mechanism that ensures that two or more concurrent threads do not simultaneously
execute some particular program segment, which can lead to data inconsistency. It is crucial for managing
access to shared resources, such as variables or objects, preventing race conditions.

     Types of Synchronization
     Method Synchronization
     Block Synchronization
     1. Method Synchronization - In method synchronization, you can declare a method as synchronized.
     This means that only one thread can access this method at a time for a specific object.

     2. Block Synchronization - Block synchronization allows you to synchronize only a specific block of code
     rather than an entire method. This is done using the synchronized keyword with an object reference.

     Key Points
     Thread Safety: Synchronization helps ensure that shared resources are accessed safely by multiple threads.
     Performance: Overuse of synchronization can lead to performance bottlenecks, so it should be used judiciously.
     Deadlock: Improper use of synchronization can lead to deadlocks, where two or more threads are waiting
     indefinitely for each other to release locks.
     By using synchronization effectively, you can manage concurrent access to shared resources and maintain
     data consistency in multi-threaded applications.

How to Avoid Deadlocks
Here are proven strategies:
- Lock Ordering
Always acquire locks in a consistent global order. If every thread locks resources in the same sequence, deadlocks can’t occur.
- Try-Lock with Timeout
Use ReentrantLock.tryLock(timeout) to avoid indefinite waiting.
if (lock.tryLock(100, TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS)) {
    // safe to proceed
}
- Avoid Nested Locks
Minimize locking inside other synchronized blocks or methods.
- Use Concurrency Utilities
Prefer ConcurrentHashMap, BlockingQueue, etc., which are designed to avoid deadlocks.
- Thread Dump Analysis
Tools like jConsole, VisualVM, or thread dumps help detect deadlocks in running applications.


